Drift Detection with Pulumi Deployments Tutorial (#12541)
pulumi/docs: content/tutorials/drift-detection-and-remediation/index.md

Initialize a new Pulumi project and pick your programming language of choice:

{{< chooser language "typescript,python,go,csharp,yaml" / >}}

{{% choosable language typescript %}}

```bash
$ mkdir learn-pulumi-drift-detection && cd learn-pulumi-drift-detection
$ pulumi new vm-aws-typescript
```

{{% /choosable %}}
{{% choosable language python %}}

```bash
$ mkdir learn-pulumi-drift-detection && cd learn-pulumi-drift-detection
$ pulumi new vm-aws-python
```

{{% /choosable %}}
{{% choosable language go %}}

```bash
$ mkdir learn-pulumi-drift-detection && cd learn-pulumi-drift-detection
$ pulumi new vm-aws-go
```

{{% /choosable %}}
{{% choosable language csharp %}}

```bash
$ mkdir learn-pulumi-drift-detection && cd learn-pulumi-drift-detection
$ pulumi new vm-aws-csharp
```

{{% /choosable %}}
{{% choosable language yaml %}}

```bash
$ mkdir learn-pulumi-drift-detection && cd learn-pulumi-drift-detection
$ pulumi new vm-aws-yaml
```

{{% /choosable %}}

Follow the prompts to set up your project and accept the default values or specify new values, such as `aws-region`.

Run `pulumi preview` to see the changes that will be made.

```bash
pulumi preview
```

> Now you can deploy the stack to see the outputs of your EC2 instance, in this case `hostname`, `ip` and `url` which you will use to introduce manual changes via the AWS console.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you can deploy the stack to see the outputs of your EC2 instance, which in this case will be `hostname`, `ip` and `url`.
```

## Clean up your resources

To avoid incurring any unwanted charges, clean up the resources you created:

1. Navigate to your stack in Pulumi Cloud and open the **Actions** menu.
2. Select the **Destroy** option to delete all resources in this stack, and click the confirmation checkbox.
3. Delete the stack by navigating to the **Settings** tab and choose **Delete stack** to remove the stack, including all its deployment history and state files from Pulumi Cloud.
4. Delete the GitHub repository you created.

## Next steps

In this tutorial, you learned how to set up automated drift detection and remediation with Pulumi Deployments. First you created an EC2 instance, including a VPC with a public subnet, an internet gateway, and a security group allowing HTTP traffic. Then, you introduced drift by manually adding a tag to your EC2 resource via the AWS console.

To learn more about drift detection with Pulumi, take a look at the following resources:

> - Learn more about [Pulumi drift detection](docs/pulumi-cloud/deployments/drift/).
> - Learn more about [Pulumi Deployments](/docs/pulumi-cloud/deployments/).
> - Learn more about [Pulumi refresh](/docs/iac/cli/commands/pulumi_refresh/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Pulumi drift detection](/docs/pulumi-cloud/deployments/drift/)
- [Pulumi Deployments](/docs/pulumi-cloud/deployments/)
- [Pulumi refresh](/docs/iac/cli/commands/pulumi_refresh/)
```

---

> title_tag: "Detect and Remediate Infrastructure Drift"

Reviewer 2: Why don't we push through changes to the deployments tutorials title as part of this PR. Yeah I like what you did to the title on this one. Its much more use cases focused, thanks for doing it

Author: going to add this as part of a new PR,, this one's now way behind main

title: "Detect and Remediate Infrastructure Drift"
layout: single
description: |
   Learn to detect and remediate infrastructure drift with Pulumi Deployments.
meta_desc: In this tutorial, learn to detect and remediate infrastructure drift in AWS using Pulumi Deployments and GitHub integration.
meta_image: meta.png

> weight: 71

Author: pushing it down, yes we need to re-order all now that we've had a big push of new content

summary: |
   In this tutorial, you will learn how to detect and remediate infrastructure drift in AWS using Pulumi Deployments. You'll create an EC2 instance, introduce drift by making manual changes via the AWS CLI or console, and then use Pulumi Deployments to detect and correct the drift.
you'll_learn:
 - How to set up and configure Pulumi Deployments for drift detection
 - How to introduce and identify infrastructure drift in an AWS environment
 - How to remediate drift ensuring your cloud infrastructure matches your desired state
prereqs:
   - Completion of the [Getting Started](/docs/get-started/) guide or familiarity with the basics of the Pulumi workflow
   - The [Pulumi CLI](/docs/install/)
   - A [Pulumi Cloud account](https://app.pulumi.com/signup) and organization subscribed to the Enterprise or Business Critical editions
   - An [Amazon Web Services](https://aws.amazon.com/) account, access key ID, and secret access key

>    - The [AWS CLI](https://aws.amazon.com/cli/)

Author: added

   - Git installed and a [GitHub account](https://github.com/) with admin rights to a repository or organization
estimated_time: 15
---

> [Drift Detection and Remediation](/docs/pulumi-cloud/deployments/drift/) is a feature of Pulumi Cloud that automates the detection and correction of drift in your cloud environments. It integrates seamlessly with Pulumi Deployments and can be incorporated into CI/CD workflows and tools using the [Pulumi CLI](/docs/cli/) or [Automation API](docs/using-pulumi/automation-api/). When changes occur outside of Pulumi, such as manual updates in the cloud provider's console, Pulumi reports these discrepancies. Auto-remediation can also be configured to refresh your last known desired state, correcting any drift without manual intervention.

Reviewer 2: I think you should mention that you can run drift detection inside your own CICD system as well. It doesn't need to only be configured with Deployments. You should link to that section of the docs if people want to do that.

Author: thx, feedback incorporated.

> [Drift Detection and Remediation](/docs/pulumi-cloud/deployments/drift/) is a feature of Pulumi Cloud that automates the detection and correction of drift in your cloud environments. It integrates seamlessly with Pulumi Deployments and can be incorporated into CI/CD workflows and tools using the [Pulumi CLI](/docs/cli/) or [Automation API](docs/using-pulumi/automation-api/). When changes occur outside of Pulumi, such as manual updates in the cloud provider's console, Pulumi reports these discrepancies. Auto-remediation can also be configured to refresh your last known desired state, correcting any drift without manual intervention.

Reviewer: Started a doc on this so we can get it all into one place.

> [Drift Detection and Remediation](/docs/pulumi-cloud/deployments/drift/) is a feature of Pulumi Cloud that automates the detection and correction of drift in your cloud environments. It integrates seamlessly with Pulumi Deployments and can be incorporated into CI/CD workflows and tools using the [Pulumi CLI](/docs/cli/) or [Automation API](docs/using-pulumi/automation-api/). When changes occur outside of Pulumi, such as manual updates in the cloud provider's console, Pulumi reports these discrepancies. Auto-remediation can also be configured to refresh your last known desired state, correcting any drift without manual intervention.

Author: fixed capitalizations for consistency

> Drift detection can be initiated via the CLI, performed on-demand in Pulumi Cloud with [Click to Deploy](/docs/pulumi-cloud/deployments/#deployment-triggers) actions, or [scheduled](/docs/pulumi-cloud/deployments/schedules/) to run at regular intervals. During each run, Pulumi compares the actual state of your cloud resources with the expected state stored in Pulumi Cloud. Any discrepancies are logged in the Drift tab, which also provides a history of detection runs, details of the drift detected, and triggered notifications. [Notifications](docs/pulumi-cloud/deployments/drift/#configuring-notifications-for-drift-detection) can be sent via webhooks, Slack, or Microsoft Teams and detail the nature and scope of the drift.

Author: thx adjusted

> To get started with Drift Detection in Pulumi, we will use Pulumi Deployments, which runs on Pulumi-hosted compute.

Author: fixed

Resources:
   + 8 created
```

Now you can view your new stack in Pulumi Cloud by following the **View in Browser** link. Click on the **Drift** tab and you will see that Drift is unavailable as your stack's deployments are not yet configured. Click on the **Configure deployments setting** to see your Deployments source control settings.

To use Drift Detection with Deployments you will first need to create a new GitHub repository.

## Create a new repository on GitHub

1. Go to [GitHub](https://github.com/new) and create a new repository manually.
2. Copy the repository URL provided by GitHub.
3. Replace the origin with your new GitHub repo using the following commands:

```bash
git init
git add .
git commit -m "Initial commit for my Pulumi Drift tutorial"
git branch -M main
git remote add origin https://github.com/your-username/learn-pulumi-drift-detection.git
git push -u origin main
```

## Configure Drift Detection

Now you will return to your browser to set your deployment configuration source control settings. Navigate to your stack `Settings` and `Deploy` tab. Next, configure the required Deployment settings, including your source control.

> 1. Add your GitHub organization/repository and the branch you created.

Author: added

2. Add your Secret environment variables, including `AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID` and `AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY`.

> {{% notes type="info" %}}

Reviewer 2: yay well done. crosslinking and promoting ESC is good!

{{% /notes %}}

Click **Save deployment configuration**.

<video autoplay loop muted playsinline>
    <source src="pulumi-configure-drift.mp4" type="video/mp4">
    Your browser does not support the video tag.
</video>

Once you have configured Pulumi Deployments, open the Actions menu and choose `Detect Drift`, then click `Deploy` to validate your stack, program and deployments are all running before we introduce drift.

![Screenshot of the Pulumi Cloud console to run a Drift Detection](./pulumi-detect-drift-action.png)

After the drift detection is complete, you will see a new Drift run on the `Drift` tab timeline. Since this is the initial check and no deviations have been introduced, you will not receive any notifications indicating that drift has been detected, nor will you see any resources with changes.

## Introduce drift

> To see Drift Detection in action, you will now introduce drift by manually making changes to your newly created EC2 resource, in this case by adding a new tag.

Reviewer 2: I think you should make a suggestion that they can change anything else they want about the created resources as well to introduce drift.

Author: adjusted the intro

> ### Add a tag to EC2 using AWS CLI

Reviewer 3: Might be a little verbose, but sounds more accurate imo as EC2 is the general name for the aws service which encompasses a bunch of other resources that fall under it, an EC2 instance being one of them.

```suggestion
### Add a tag to the EC2 instance using AWS CLI
```

Author: done, thx

> To add a tag via the AWS CLI you will first need to retrieve the EC2 Instance ID before you can add a tag. Use the the following command:

Reviewer 3: _Just my opinion here:_

Can we add a sentence here to explicitly call out this can be done one of two ways, like "This can be done using the AWS CLI or using the AWS console"? It's probably already somewhat obvious, but If reading this tutorial top to bottom as is, you would first run into adding the tag via cli and then move to the next section which is adding via the console which looks like another step to complete. This is just so it is clear this is an either or and the user doesn't do the same step twice.

Author: thx, I'll go with the console version

```bash
   aws ec2 describe-instances --filters "Name=tag:Name,Values=webserver" --query "Reservations[*].Instances[*].InstanceId" --output text
```

Now, add the tag with the key `Description` and the value `Pulumi Drift Detection`:

```bash
   aws ec2 create-tags --resources <instance-id> --tags Key=Description,Value="Pulumi Drift Detection"
```

Replace `<instance-id>` with the actual instance ID of your EC2 instance.

> ### Add a tag to EC2 using the AWS console

Reviewer 3: same as  above

```suggestion
### Add a tag to the EC2 instance using the AWS console
```

Author: thx added

> ### Add a tag to EC2 using the AWS console

Reviewer 2: cant you shove this stuff into a tabbed chooser module? otherwise you need to make it clear these are the same instructions executed 2 different ways..

Reviewer: Agree -- we don't need both of these. Suggest just using the console version. It's simpler.

Reviewer 2: I think I requested in the last edit to add a CLI version since its actually faster to do that since you already have the credentials in the CLI

Author: dropped the console version

As the final step of this tutorial select the **Remediate drift** option in the Actions drop down on your stack page to remediate the manual changes. Once the deployment is complete, your infrastructure will be restored to the desired state expressed in your code.

## Automate Drift Detection

In addition to manually triggering drift detection, you can automate this process by scheduling regular drift detection runs using [Deployment Schedules](/docs/pulumi-cloud/deployments/schedules/). This ensures that any unexpected changes in your infrastructure are promptly identified and remediated without manual intervention.

## Clean up your resources

To avoid incurring any unwanted charges, clean up the resources you created:

1. Navigate to your stack in Pulumi Cloud and open the **Actions** menu.
2. Select the **Destroy** option to delete all resources in this stack, and click the confirmation checkbox.
3. Delete the stack by navigating to the **Settings** tab and choose **Delete stack** to remove the stack, including all its deployment history and state files from Pulumi Cloud.
4. Delete the GitHub repository you created.

## Next Steps

> In this tutorial, you created an EC2 instance with Pulumi, including a VPC with a public subnet, an internet gateway, and a security group allowing HTTP traffic. Then, you introduced drift by manually adding a tag to your EC2 resource via the AWS console. Finally, you learned how to detect your drifted infrastructure and how to remediate the manual changes.

Reviewer: I'd definitely reword this to put the important stuff first -- that what you did in this tutorial was learn how to set up automated drift detection and remediation with Pulumi Deployments. (That you happened to use an EC2 instance with a VPC, subnet, gateway, etc., is ultimately irrelevant.)

Author: done

To learn more about Drift Detection with Pulumi, take a look at the following resources:

- Learn more about [Pulumi Drift Detection](docs/pulumi-cloud/deployments/drift/).

> - Learn more about [Pulumi Deployments](/docs/pulumi-cloud/deployments/).

Reviewer: I'd probably mention learning more about Pulumi refresh here, since that's what drift detection is based on, and if we choose not to cover setting up the schedule here (which I think we should!), we should mention how to set that up also here.

Author: done
